# Introspection API
The Introspection API allows you to access JDA-Commands' [properties](property.md) and event system during runtime.

## Note on Propane
The [property](./property.md) and introspection system of JDA-Commands is based on
[Propane](https://github.com/goldmensch/propane).
In most cases, you won't directly access propane but the wrappers around it provided by JDA-Commands
like <JDACIntrospection>, <JDACProperty> etc. These are generated by propane as specializations
of general types like <IntrospectionSkeleton> and <Property>. If you debug your bot or encounter any problems, it may be helpful
to visit the documentation or [source code](https://github.com/Goldmensch/propane) of Propane.

## Accessing the API
To access the API, you can either use

- <JDACommands#introspection()> and <Event#introspection()>
- or <JDACIntrospection#accessScoped()> that will return the instance bound to the current scope

### Using Scoped Access
When accessing trough <JDACIntrospection#accessScoped()>, you have to pay attention where you do so.
An <JDACIntrospection> instance is set in most but not in all places, to know where you can use it take a look at the
<io.github.kaktushose.jdac.annotations.IntrospectionAccess> annotation, which is present on all user implementable methods of JDA-Commands.

Inside of [interaction controller methods](../interactions/overview.md#structure) 
the <JDACIntrospection> instance is always set with the stage <JDACScope#INTERACTION>, providing access to all [`Properties`][[JDACProperty]].

!!! note
    Internally we use Javas <ScopedValue>s for this. If you want to know how <JDACIntrospection#accessScoped()> works in regard
    with Threads make yourself familiar with their docs.

## Getting [Properties][[JDACProperty]]
!!! info
    Please make yourself conformable with our [Properties System](property.md) before reading this section.

The [Property System](property.md) allows accessing all public components and configuration options of JDA-Commands.
It can be used to retrieve framework services like <MessageResolver>, config options like <JDACProperty#GLOBAL_REPLY_CONFIG>
or context dependent information like <InvocationContext>.

Sometimes it's required to access such parts of the framework in places were they aren't available as a "traditional" 
method or constructor parameter. Thus, you can access all parts via properties by using <JDACIntrospection#get(JDACProperty)>.

Please note that access is read-only, you can't set the value of a <JDACProperty> after starting the framework.

### Stage
A <JDACProperty>'s value isn't set in all places where you could access it.
The value of such properties varies depending on the scope (in code) where you access the <JDACIntrospection> class.

To know what property is accessible, take a look at [JDACIntrospection#scope()][[IntrospectionSkeleton#scope()]] and compare it to <Property#scope()>.
A hint on the current stage is also provided by <IntrospectionAccess#value()>, which can be found on user implementable 
methods of JDA-Commands.

When accessing the Introspection API inside an [interaction controller method](../interactions/overview.md#structure)
the stage is always <JDACScope#INTERACTION> providing access to all properties.
During instantiation (inside the constructor) of an interaction controller class, the stage is set to <JDACScope#RUNTIME>.

## Subscribing to <JDACEvent>s
Sometimes it's convenient to execute some custom code at some point during the runtime.

An example can be found inside the Guice Extension, were we use a <RuntimeCloseEvent> to remove
the interaction controller instances inside the cache at the end of a conversation.

To listen to a <JDACEvent> you use <JDACIntrospection#subscribe(Listener)> which returns 
a <dev.goldmensch.propane.event.Subscription> allowing you to ["unsubscribe"][[Subscription#unsubscribe()]]
from this event later. If a <JDACEvent> is fired by JDA-Commands all 
<dev.goldmensch.propane.event.Listener>s of that event are called.

!!! warning
    It's important to know that the events are published by multiple threads perhaps concurrently, 
    thus <dev.goldmensch.propane.event.Listener>s may be also called concurrently. They have to be 
    written with thread-safety in mind!

### Accessing <JDACIntrospection> inside <dev.goldmensch.propane.event.Listener>
A <dev.goldmensch.propane.event.Listener> provides two arguments:

- the published instance of <JDACEvent>
- the <JDACIntrospection> instance used to publish the event

To know in which <JDACScope> the event is published (and thus what [Properties][[JDACProperty]] can be used), take a look
at the <io.github.kaktushose.jdac.annotations.IntrospectionAccess> annotation of the specific <JDACEvent> subclass.

For example, <InteractionStartEvent> has [`@IntrospectionAccess(JDACScope.INTERACTION)]`][[io.github.kaktushose.jdac.annotations.IntrospectionAccess]], which means
that inside of `Listener#accept(InteractionStartEvent, JDACIntrospection)]` the scope <JDACScope#INTERACTION>
is set meaning all properties can be accessed.

You can also call <JDACIntrospection#accessScoped()> and <JDACIntrospection#scopedGet(JDACProperty)> inside of them!


### Example
```java
class MySubscriber implements Listener<InteractionStartEvent, JDACScope, JDACIntrospection> {

    public void accept(InteractionStartEvent event, JDACIntrospection introspection) { // (2)
        JDA jda = introspection.get(JDACProperty.JDA); // (1)
        
        User user = event.invocationContext().event().getUser();
        log.info("Started interaction for user: {}", user.getName());
    }
}
```

1. you can access the introspection instance used to publish this event to get framework components
2. <InteractionStartEvent> has <IntrospectionAccess#value()> set to <JDACScope#INTERACTION>, thus allowing us to access properties available in this stage

